---
layout: post
title: Something Happened at the Jeff Mall
author: Joshua Goodnewt
excerpt: "I want to draw attention to a matter that is conspicuously absent from the ongoing discussion: a recognition of the woman’s pervasive scorn for the poor."

---

The nation is agape at a Louisville-area woman’s racist tirade attacking two Latina women who she believed cut in front of her in line. If I may summarize her tirade, she resented what she perceived as undeserving indolence merely because she believed, based entirely upon the women’s skin color and language, that they didn’t "belong" here.

The press and the public have rightfully condemned her racism, and the Jefferson Mall—where the harassment occurred—has reportedly banned the woman permanently. Moreover, many have correctly acknowledged and condemned the silence of the small crowd of onlookers, who did nothing to quiet the woman’s racist harassment or to defend these women who did nothing to deserve such an attack. We must do better than that. We must stand up to such racist harassment and demonstrate to its victims that we will defend them, that we care about and value them, and offer them what safety we can.

However, I want to draw attention to a matter that is conspicuously absent from the ongoing discussion: a recognition of the woman’s pervasive scorn for the poor. In her tirade, she did not merely sneer at the women as “illegal” or “foreign,” she seemed to espouse two mutually exclusive beliefs: that the women didn’t “belong here” and that they were welfare recipients who "we" are all paying for. (Undocumented immigrants cannot receive welfare or food stamps—they lack the necessary identification.) In conflating these two exclusive attributes, her tirade was shot through with derision for people who turn to the government for assistance in providing the necessities of life—food, shelter, and clothing—because they cannot afford them. She resented “our” “paying for” these necessities for other people. In short, she saw them as undeserving parasites on our economic fortune.

Even if the women were undocumented and they somehow could receive welfare, (and they wanted to receive welfare, and they did receive welfare) this woman's beef should not be with the two innocent women in front of her. This country is the richest in the world. Our per capita GDP is over $53,000. That's more than my salary. Despite the fact that, per person—working or not—we output more than I make as an attorney, we somehow cannot "afford" to support the least fortunate within our borders. Instead, people are made to feel like their own, individual, meager wealth is under threat from invaders and "criminals."

This is the fruit of income inequality. This woman was fighting a proxy battle in an ongoing class war, but for the wrong side. Her racism blinded her to our common cause. Indeed, our adversaries should not be one another, but the real parasites on our economic fortunes: capitalists who exploit our labor and productivity, reaping the gains for themselves and leaving a mere pittance to support ourselves in lifestyles which would be impossible without subsidy from further subordination and exploitation of our fellow men and women (and children!) in other countries.
 We need to continue to fight racism (and sexism, and homophobia, and Islamophobia, and all such identity-based oppression), and to that end I am somewhat encouraged by the anti-racist response to the woman’s tirade. But we also need to fight classism. That means we need to stop seeing the poor as undeserving and we need to stop believing that wealth equals virtue.
