---
layout: post
title: Socialist International Info Sheet
date: 2017-05-21 09:24:26
author: Nick Conder
---

**What is the Socialist International?**
The socialist movement has a long history of international partnership and solidarity between socialists in different countries, dating back to the mid-19th century. Democratic socialists have organized into international groupings of parties in various forms, with the Socialist International (SI) being formed in 1951 of predominantly European social democratic parties and the Socialist Party of America. In the 1970s, the Socialist Party of America split into different groups, one of which was the Democratic Socialists Organizing Committee—which evolved into our DSA. At the same time, SI began adding parties from throughout the world, but many socialists parties in Europe and elsewhere were beginning to turn towards the center with the rise of neoliberalism. Some SI member parties—such as the PRI in Mexico—have a history of authoritarianism, while others (such as those in Europe) have embraced neoliberal capitalist economic policies.

**Has anybody left SI?**
Many of the more centrist parties have actually left SI in recent years to form the “Progressive Alliance” with groups such as the US Democratic Party. Due to the neoliberal turn of many remaining SI parties, more left-wing formations (such as Die Linke in Germany and Podemos in Spain) have formed in the last 15 years and are attempting to reinvigorate the left of their countries. Many of these new parties are not only not in SI, but are in bitter conflict with SI parties in their countries. Meanwhile, some parties (such as the British Labour Party) have downgraded to observer status—retaining speaking rights but no longer voting on SI matters.

**Issues between DSA and SI**
DSA pays dues of $3,750 per year to SI, but in the past have had issues meeting these payments during years when the organization was struggling. DSA has incurred an unknown amount of debt owed to SI—but the SI staff have repeatedly ignored communications from DSA staff about the proper way to negotiate payment of this debt. SI has also had a history of randomly raising the dues that DSA owed the organization, and have made little attempts to engage with DSA during trips to the United States—an example being young socialists from other countries partnering with the Young Democrats instead of the Young Democratic Socialists. Furthermore, trips to SI conferences involve traveling expenses of several thousand dollars; past DSA delegations have consisted only of people who could afford to pay their own way.

**Our Options**
1) The first option is to remain a member of SI. This option would involve negotiating debt payment, continuing to pay dues, continuing to rely on self-financing for delegations to SI conferences, and attempts to encourage SI member parties to move toward more left-wing policies. DSA’s recent membership growth would probably allow for an increased budget for SI expenses. There are concerns that this option leaves DSA unable to express our problems with SI, and that we may be unable to build partnerships with non-SI parties.

2) The second option is to downgrade to observer status. We have been unable to determine if dues and debt payments would change if DSA downgraded to observer status. Traveling expenses would likely remain the same. In observer status we would not forfeit relationships with other socialist groups and parties in SI, nor would we lose speaking rights in SI conferences. DSA would no longer be able to vote on SI policies.

3) The third option is to withdraw from SI completely. This would end the financial obligations of dues payment and travel expenses. While this would end DSA’s partnerships with SI and its member parties, it may allow DSA to form stronger relationships with non-SI socialist parties. This would send a clear message about where DSA places its priorities, but would leave DSA without an international affiliation.
